---
title: "Doing STEM Homework with JupyterLab"
tags:
  - mathjax
use_math: true
---

# INTRODUCTION

High school and college students today are required to use the computer for studying, research, writing, laboratory work, and loads more. Many students use Microsoft Office, Google Docs, or other similar business applications for the work. These applications are just what the liberal arts and business school students need. But they are less than ideal for STEM students.

Traditionally, STEMers used [$\TeX$ typesetting system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TeX) written by [Donald Knuth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Knuth), the world famous American computer scientist. Most computer science, engineering, and mathematics textbooks are prepared using $\TeX$. This article was prepared using Markdown and MathJax, distant descendants of $\TeX$. However, $\TeX$ was designed not for word processing but for typesetting, specifically for typesetting mathematics: every sentence and equation must, therefore, be laboriously annotated with formatting command codes. Once printed, the document looks like it was typeset by a textbook publisher. But in the source form, it resembles the HTML code of a web page. Most writers naturally consider the $\TeX$ source document unreadable, and instead adopt run-of-the-mill word processors. The biggest problem with word processors, though, is that while their text formatting capabilities are acceptable for business use, their mathematical typesetting capabilities are woefully inadequate for STEM use.

Fortunately, we now have [Jupyter](https://jupyter.org/), an interactive programming and document preparation system. Jupyter is a user interface for literate programming, a programming paradigm invented by Knuth in which a programme is a document that contains both the implementation code and the textual description thereof. A Jupyter document, called a *notebook*, can be read like a technical article that contains paragraphs and equations explaining the purpose and behaviour of the embedded code. But this document can also be run like an interactive programme that consumes live input data and generates instantaneous output, such as a table or a chart, which is also embedded in the document. When the input data are updated, the output immediately reflects the changes. In other words, a Jupyter notebook is the ideal medium for preparing technical articles and reports, whether for solo work or for group project. Jupyter is as capable as $\TeX$ when it comes to maths typesetting, and it is as convenient to use as a word processor when it comes to text typing.

The [literate programming](https://www.cs.tufts.edu/~nr/cs257/archive/literate-programming/01-knuth-lp.pdf) concept dates back to Knuth's original work in 1984. The motivation was to make code and its description fully integrated. And the user interface that supports literate programming is the [computational notebook](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Notebook_interface), a live document that allows the user to manipulate both code and text. In the days of the [VT100](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VT100) terminal and [Emacs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emacs), a live document was an inspirational idea. Today, though, every web page is a live document that contains text, user interface components, and JavaScript code that animate those elements. Yet, despite the impressive utility of web pages, the immense capabilities of IDEs, and a quarter-century of experience, web application development today still remain tedious, heavyweight, and unproductive. That is, web development is an illiterate programming environment.

The most comprehensive implementation of literate programming was [Mathematica](https://www.wolfram.com/mathematica/), which came out in 1988. Mathematica is a commercial software for mathematical computing: symbolic computation, linear algebra, graph theory, machine learning, statistics, visualisation, the lot. Its live-notebook user interface is arguably the best of its kind. Given its high price, though, very few could afford it, and of those who could afford it, still fewer numbers learned to use its Wolfram language.

With the release of Jupyter in 2015, the notebook concept has been democratised: Jupyter is an open-source software and it is designed to serve as the user interface (frontend) to any computational kernel (backend). Among the Jupyter kernels, the one based on the Python programming environment is the most popular one. By the way, the "ju" in "Jupyter" refers to the Julia language, "py" to the Python language, and "r" to the R language—three most commonly used programming languages in data analysis.

Python is adored by programmers, and it is also loved by those who write programmes occasionally—engineers, statisticians, analysts, and the like—because this language is easy to learn, easy to read, easy to write both large and small programmes, runs with adequate efficiency, and has extensive collection of third-party libraries for every imaginable application domain. Indeed, very young children are now taught Python on kid-friendly microcontrollers, like the [BBC micro:bit](https://microbit.org/code/#python). In short, although Python is not the best in any single aspect in an application domain, it is above average in the most important aspects within any application domain. For these reasons, Python is great for weekend programmers. So, I shall use Jupyter's Python kernel in this article.

To be able to use Jupyter well, however, you will need to learn [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) for text preparation, $\LaTeX$ for maths typesetting, Python for data manipulation, and Git for group collaboration. Although it seems like a lot of prerequisite knowledge, it is fairly easy to get started with Jupyter. And everything you need, documentation, software, account, storage, etc., is freely available; all you need is a tablet or a laptop. The goals of this article are to introduce the basic uses of Jupyter and to provide guide to resources on the more advanced uses. But note that this is not a typical beginner's guide; I jumpped right into creating charts, typesetting mathematics, and Python programming. I skipped the obligatory descriptions of installation and interface; for that, I refer you to the Jupyter online manual. Upon completing this article, you will be able to use Jupyter to create high school and college level term papers and lab reports, with textbook-quality appearance.

